---
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

# Human malate dehydrogenase 1

# P40925

# Phosphorylation of SER 325

## Description

Malate dehydrogenase exists in 3 genes in humans with 4 isoforms: MDH1,
MDH2, MDH1B, and MDH1x.¹ MDH1 and MDH2 are highly expressed, with the
other two isoforms being less common throughout the body.¹ Malate
dehydrogenases are nucleotide-binding proteins that are classified as
NAD-dependent and are responsible for the catalyzation of the reversible
oxidation of malate to oxaloacetate.²,³ Specifically, MDH1 is located in
the cytosol, while MDH2 is located in the mitochondria.¹ MDH is vital to
both the malate-aspartate shuttle and the tricarboxylic acid cycle.²

The malate-aspartate shuttle describes the transportation of NADH to the
mitochondria to maximize ATP production.⁴ The shuttle is important to
regulating both glycolysis and lactate metabolism in the heart.⁴ The
tricarboxylic acid cycle, or the Krebs cycle/citric acid cycle, is used
in aerobic organisms to generate energy by oxidizing acetyl-CoA.⁵ MDH1
specifically plays a role in the malate-aspartate shuttle of the urea
cycle.²,³ MDH1 overexpression can contribute to a variety of cancers
through increasing cell proliferation due to increased levels of NAD in
human cytosol.² While both MDH1 and MDH2 display higher levels in cancer
patients, MDH1 is specifically associated with poor prognosis.¹

1.  image of the unmodified site ![Overview of unmodified
    SER325](images/unmodified_SER325_overview.png)

2.  image of modification site ![Overview of phosphorylated
    SEP325](images/modifiedPTMSEP325_overview.png)

## Effect of the sequence variant and PTM on MDH dynamics

Part 3 from the Project 4 report

1.  Image of aligned PDB files (no solvent) ![Superposed
    overview,unmodified SER325(turquoise), mimic ASP325(purple),
    PTMSEP325(lime)](images/superposed_models.png)

2.  Image of the site with the aligned PDB files (no solvent) ![Aligned
    modification site](images/aligned_rgroup.png)

3.  Annotated RMSF plot showing differences between the simulations
    ![Unmodified RMSF plot with SEP 325
    highlighted](images/unmodified_annotatedRMSF.png) ![Mimic ASP 325
    RMSF plot with ASP 325
    highlighted](images/mimicASP325_annotatedRMSF.png)

4.  Annotated plots of pKa for the key amino acids ![Unmodified pKa
    boxplot of active and substrate binding
    sites](images/unmodified_pKaboxplot.png) ![Mimic pKa boxplot of
    active site, substrate binding site, and ASP
    325](images/mimicASP325_boxplot.png)

5.  If needed, show ligand bound images and how modification affects
    substrate binding

![Alphafill describing unmodified binding
site](images/unmodified_alphafill.png)

Description of the data and changes

## Comparison of the mimic and the authentic PTM

Part 4 from the Project 4 report outline include images as needed

![Bonding of unmodified SER 325;GLU 321 O-N SER 325 H bond,GLU 321 O-OG
SER 325 H bond](images/unmodified_bonds.png) ![Bonding of SEP 325;GLU
328 N-O SEP 325 H bond,SEP 325 N-O GLU 321 H
bond](images/modifiedSEP325_bonds.png) ![Bonding of ASP325;ASP 325 N-O
GLU 321 H bond](images/mimicASP325_bonds.png)

## Authors

Lauryn Garvin

## Deposition Date

## License

Shield: [![CC BY-NC
4.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-CC%20BY--NC%204.0-lightgrey.svg)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/)

This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International
License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

[![CC BY-NC
4.0](https://licensebuttons.net/l/by-nc/4.0/88x31.png)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/)

## References

-   Citation1
    ![10.1042/EBC20230078](https://doi.org/10.1042/EBC20230078)

-   Citation2
    ![10.1021/acsomega.1c04385](https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.1c04385)

-   Citation3
    ![10.1007/s00439-019-02063-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-019-02063-z.)

-   Citation4
    ![10.1016/j.jtbi.2008.05.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2008.05.033)

-   Citation5
    ![10.3390/life11010069](https://doi.org/10.3390/life11010069)
