---
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

# Human MDH2

# Uniprot ID: P40926

# Variation: phosphorylation of T248 (T244 in structure)

## Description

MDH2 is used to regulate the ATP and NAD in cells, mutations in MDH2
have been linked to disruptions to homeostasis and metabolic diseases
(Parent et al. 2024). This site has been previously modified twice with
the T being changed to I (ILE) and S (SER).

1.  Comparison of MDH2 model with PTM and modified ![Sites of MDH2
    unmodified, the modified and the PTM mimic, zoomed into the site of
    the change at 224](images/mol_star_3_images.png)

2.  Superimposed alignment within MDH2 ![Comparison of PTM (Green) and
    modification (purple) superimposed with hydrogen bonds
    visable](images/PTM_and_Modified_molstar.png)

## Effect of the sequence variant and PTM on MDH dynamics

After running the PTM mimic into the Colab notebooks, the RMSV values
were compared with the MDH2 RMSV values collected in project 2. The
files were also all aligned into mol star to see structural
differences. 1. Aligned images with Amino Acids Labled, green is the
modified, blue is PTM mimic and the yellow that is hidden under the blue
is the original. ![3 models
superimposed](images/molstar_3_models_superimpose.png) 2. Modified site
with PTM mimic, blue, and modified, green, labeled showing weak
interactions (hydrogen bonds). ![PTM and modified
superimposed](images/PTM_and_Modified_molstar.png) 3. RMSF graph showing
differences between the PTM mimic and original model ![These are the
RMSF values with colored lines to show scale since the Y axis are
different.](images/RMSF_graph_comparison.png) Lines were added to allow
for easier comparison since the scale on the Y-axis was not consistent
between the two.

4.  Annotated plots of pKa for the amino acids in site 224. ![pKa
    comparison graph](images/PTM_and_MDH2_pKa_graphs.png) Left graph
    shows the PTM mimic and the right is the original model of MDH2.

The RMSF graph show more flexibility in the PTM mimic since there was
more fluctuation. Looking around the site 224 the main differences seen
was a change from approximately 0.40 to 0.25 in the PTM mimic showing
less deviation from the mean. The pKa graph comparison shows a slight
uptick in the pKA for the PTM mimic which indicates a change for the
protein to be less acidic. There was a more fluctuation for the pKA in
the PTM mimic overall but this could be from the equilibration in the
site.

## Comparison of the mimic and the authentic PTM

The mimic variant or modified version had an amino acid change in site
224 from THR to ASP. The PTM is phosphorylated that changed from THR to
TPO, also in the site 224. There are significant structural differences
the PTM model has an alpha helix whereas the modified version is a
string which is the same as the original. The rest of the parts of the
protein are unchanged and match up well. ![PTM and modified model
superimposed](images/PTM_and_Modified_molstar.png)

The largest difference between these two structures is that there is an
extra hydrogen bond in the PTM mimic, this is an extra bond with SER
222. Both models have hydrogen bonds with ASP 43 and ALA 228. ![All
models labeled with amino acids with
bonds](images/3_models_amino_acids_labled.png)

The overall the modified model is not a good approximation of the PTM
model. The modified is similar to the MDH2 original model but when
comparing the modified and PTM there are many differences in structure
of the amino acid. In terms of the hydrogen bonds there is 2 out of 3
the same between the two with an extra being in the PTM which helps with
stabilization.

## Authors

Ava Driggers

## Deposition Date

05/04/2025

## License

Shield: [![CC BY-NC
4.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-CC%20BY--NC%204.0-lightgrey.svg)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/)

This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International
License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

[![CC BY-NC
4.0](https://licensebuttons.net/l/by-nc/4.0/88x31.png)](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/)

## References
